---
layout: post
title:  "Perspectives on the IITian Identity: A Spectrum of Views"
date:   2023-08-20T20:57:38+05:30
author: Abhinav Jain
categories: Blog
tags:	IIT Experience
cover:  "/assets/iitb-banner.jpg"
---

For countless Indians and academicians across the globe, the Indian Institute of Technology, commonly referred to as IIT, requires no formal introduction. With the inception of the first IIT in Kolkata back in 1950, later relocated to Kharagpur, IITs have consistently upheld their status as the premier Indian institutions and have served as the bedrock of technological prowess in India in the subsequent years. Graduates from IITs have made substantial contributions across diverse domains, encompassing technology, business, politics, and even spirituality. Eminent figures such as Narayan Murthy, Sundar Pichai, and Raghuram Rajan readily come to mind. The impact of these individuals has reverberated throughout the lives of countless individuals in India and the world.

With the role of IITs and IITians set in stone in Indian society, it's no wonder why everyone's parent dream that their kid study at IIT one day. I recollect an anecdote shared by an uncle during the felicitation ceremony at my coaching institution following the announcement of our JEE results.

*"I was visiting Mumbai with my son for a work-related trip, after my work was done, I took my son to the gates of IIT Bombay hoping to visit the campus and inspire my child before he starts his preparation at this institute. When we got there, we were stopped by the guards and told that we are not allowed to enter randomly into the campus. It was that day when I decided to do anything I could to make sure my kid entered those gates and shows me the campus around..."*

To be honest, this was not just the story of that Uncle; every day my mother slightly nudged me towards the dream of IIT. I didn't want to be an IIT alumnus, I wanted to be an Astronaut but for me, every path started from IIT as per my mother. I was good with technical stuff, liked science and it was a very natural choice for me to pursue IIT so no problems at all. But for many students who went to cities like Kota, IIT was not there, it was their parents, their village's dream. Even today, my parents cannot introduce me to someone else without telling them that I am an IIT alumni within the first three sentences. It's hilarious.

The hype of IIT doesn't end with just the older generation though. Every year, the local newspapers in India publish the ranks of JEE exam qualifiers of their town. The TV and print media reports on the fat salary offered to IITians in their campus placements. Social media websites like Youtube, Quora and Reddit are filled with posts related to the clout of IITians and fan posts of JEE and GATE aspirants. The hype doesn't end at placements, with Indian society largely following the concept of arranged marriage IITian grooms and brides are highly sought after. There's even a separate matrimonial website for IITians to find their life partner. This hype pushes more and more parents and students to put more and more effort into succeeding in the competitive Joint Entrance Exam (JEE) and Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE). A whole plethora of training industry exists which is meant to train students in tricks for Maths, shortcuts for Physics and rote learning for Chemistry of senior school levels for JEE. Cities like Kota and Vishakhapatnam have emerged as centres for preparation. Students follow strict military-style routines jam-packed with classes, self-study and revision sessions.

To be fair, the prevalence of hype is greatly influenced by society's attention towards IITians, reflecting a reciprocal relationship between supply and demand. Due to the absence of a thriving entrepreneurial culture, which can be attributed to the prolonged period of license raj and persisting bureaucratic hurdles in conducting business, a substantial amount of Indian families continue to view secure jobs as the most straightforward avenue for advancement. Society heavily calls on people who try to be different or innovative. While the country goes head over heels in applauding entrepreneurs like Radhakishan Damani for their business prowess, little encouragement is given to young folks to solve problems that people face in society. Due to a weird mix of history and social system, many Indian parents only allow their kids to follow paths like cake moulds. Finish high school, join JEE preparation classes in junior college, become an engineer, then get an MBA or get a Software Engineer Job or work in Civil Services for the rest of their life. While there are too many families to make such a sweeping generalisation on all of them, the above scenario holds for many middle-class families with some small variation in the cake mould like becoming a doctor instead of an engineer first. Unfortunately, it's not only the parents affected by the dream of achievement and upliftment. Numerous students perceive the examination itself as the paramount moment in their lives. Consequently, you encounter IIT graduates who have already reached their pinnacle in life or who have tragically succumbed to the pressures of stress and anxiety, leading to severe outcomes.

The unwarranted hardships arising from intense competition and elevated expectations are beginning to negatively impact the reputation of IITs. My friends have had discussions about how girls straight away reject IITians on apps like Tinder and Bumble. There are heated debates on social media about the usefulness of IITs over the subsidies provided by the Government of India every year. Critics are swift to highlight that a significant number of IIT alumni choose to depart the country, seemingly offering little back to the society that funded their costly education through taxpayer money. They serve on foreign lands and to foreign masters instead of innovating in India. On the other hand, the pro-IIT crowd is quick to point out the economic benefit brought by IITians in terms of foreign remittances and jobs created by startups headed by IITians. The opponents label the supporters for hyping up the roles of IITs while the supporters call out the opponents as jealous. The thing is the truth is somewhere in the middle. And it's not the IITians at fault. Let's go over some stories, shall we

**Story 1**

I have a friend who currently works at a reputed MNC in Gurgaon. The guy is very ambitious and got his current job by learning about the field all by himself without the help of his institute IIT Bombay. One day while on a call, my friend said to me

*"You know, I earn good, but I am not happy with my current salary. Another guy in my team who comes from a Tier 3 college is in the same post as me and makes almost the same as me. Today he earns less than me but 5 years down the line, I know even with my best efforts I'll be only rewarded as much as him because of company policy and the gap between our salaries will close further. I feel like I haven't even been able to utilise or benefit from my IIT tag."*

**Story 2**

A senior of mine, who was very much interested in pursuing his core non-circuit branch and even held a Master's in the field recently switched to another field that pays better and is now working for a multinational firm. As we met in a cafe and I asked for his reason for the switch he said

*"The place where I worked had pretty nice people, unfortunately, the pay was too low and I realised that this was not the passion I had. Since I had some background related to my current field at IIT, I got some referrals through my friends and quickly moved on to the new field before it was too late."*

**Story 3**

While talking about career and life plans, another friend of mine who is doing a PhD at a prestigious university abroad expressed his career plans along the lines of

*"Yeah, I haven't decided on the career right now. I can become a researcher or a professor or join some company, I will only be able to decide after my PhD. I am not much worried since my field has ample opportunities in this country"*

For the sake of clarification, it's important to note that his area of interest is not something commonplace, such as Computers or Economics. And research in his field requires ample grants and sponsorship.

**Story 4**

I once fell into an intense conversation about the talent and rewards given to IITians by a non-IIT colleague. To quote his point on the issue

*"I have met so many IITians bro, and let me tell you, a majority of them were poor at their work and had too much attitude. IITs are honestly not worth the credit given to them. They anyway end up working in Software jobs just like the rest of us..."*
\
\
\
So what is the learning from these stories? Let's try to summarise the points.

From story 1 we get that IITians can be competitive, given the prestige of IITs and the hard work it takes to get there means that what can be an achievement to an average folk can be a low reward for IITians. And it's not unjustified; IITians have also aspired to attain success and accomplishments. Discovering that their IIT education might not have been essential for reaching their current positions can indeed be disheartening. The accomplishments of individuals who did not attend IIT cannot be overlooked. There are surely very hardworking and talented folks out there. But if the IIT tag, which is supposed to be a certificate of authenticity in hard work/talent does not help him climb the ladder then what use is it?

In Story 2, a more straightforward observation emerges for me: it appears that India lacks abundant opportunities in non-circuit branches. Even the presented opportunities are low paying and do not seem to respect the talent they hired from India's best technical institutes

Story 3 is the reverse version of Story 2. Outside has more opportunities and provides support in unconventional fields or research and development.

The last story helps paint the picture that outsiders have for IITians. My colleagues' experience was true and many of us, including myself end up working in the Software industry. So does that mean that IITs are useless? Well no, because the missing link in this conundrum is the fact that most IITians who do not find good work in non-Software fields either switch to other fields like Software, Data Science, Consulting and Management or simply go out to pursue Master's degree and PhD at universities like MIT, Ivy leagues, Swiss universities, etc. Therefore, my colleague encountered individuals who either lacked enthusiasm for their job or failed to meet those who were motivated enough to consider leaving the country.

With my experience going through JEE preparation and then graduating from IIT and talking to other people about their experiences with IIT or IITians, this is the set of points I came up with some pointers that can explain the actual underlying arguments for the IIT debate

1. Indian society does not allow kids to pursue a wide range of career options
2. Indian government failed to provide and encourage support for business and entrepreneurship
3. Research and development requires money, IITs, though heavily subsidised and funded by Indian standards, still lack the fundings that can match the levels of top institutes of the world
4. Many IITian kids who are stuck in India due to any reason feel underwhelmed by the salary offered to them in India
5. The push to earn higher and achieve "success" forces them to look for jobs and Software fields like Software Engineer, Data Scientist, etc. Outsiders meeting them have a sampling bias
6. Of course extremists exists on both side of the debate and are happy to ruin the discussion on the actual topic further

While debating what IITs provide to this country, I found that some real benefits get left out by the crowd supporting IITs that are unseen to the opposing crowds. The biggest of these benefits is that of exposure. I remember when the first time I had put my eye on the telescope's eyepiece. To say the sight of Jupiter, Saturn, Andromeda and Orion nebula was mesmerising would be an understatement. Astronomy is an expensive hobby. Consequently, without IIT, I would have never had the opportunity to explore telescopes and dip my hands in amateur astronomy. I never would have been able to take on and conduct an entire event to premiere a documentary across multiple IITs in collaboration with a major production house. I would have never met some of the most competitive, hardworking and talented people that make up the IIT community. This is where IIT excels - offering students an environment and platform to compete, innovate, and refine their newly acquired skills. Whether it be developing software, writing, dancing, singing, swimming or even debating. IITs all over are incubation centres for young inexperienced minds to experience personal development and foster their conceptual capabilities instead of rote learning and answering exams using previous years' question papers. The personality development over college life is what contributes IIT alumni to pursuing their startups, some of which turn into multi-billion dollar enterprises and create growth for the economy on multiple levels.

There are many non-IIT founders as well who have made significant business. But as mentioned above the Indian society heavily calls upon doing anything else out of the cake mould. It requires significant will to drive a business and non-IIT founders draw their confidence from other aspects of their life. IIT alumni on the other hand have a significant privilege and support to start their companies. Something which might not have been possible if they did not study at an IIT.

Hence, it is important to understand correctly where IITs benefit the country and where they don't. The buzz surrounding the top institutions in this country is not unfounded. But it is overboard and more importantly, misplaced in the eyes of society. Institutes like Harvard and MIT are also hyped quite a lot and are celebrated as achievements of the USA in many Hollywood plots. So to think that IITs are so publicised in India is frankly a wrong comparison.

IITs do not serve as a universal solution to all the educational challenges faced by this country. Increasing their number won't address all the issues related to the quality of education in our nation; in reality, it further dilutes the IIT brand. The current institutions are more than enough to cater to the tech talent required from Indians around the world. What needs to be done is supporting non-IIT institutions to inculcate more non-academic activities on their campuses, more funding for research and push for high-quality educators who challenge students with every question rather than copy-pasting previous years' question papers again and again. The government also acknowledges these points and has taken some steps. I recall the idea of Atal tinkering labs which aims to foster technical skills in high school students. The idea was picked from the concept of the Tinkerers' lab at IIT Bombay and similar student tech space at other IITs. The Tinkerers' lab was founded by alumni of various years and is a simple yet good example of showcasing the role of IITians in directing public policy without being uber-famous or influential. The steps taken so far might not be enough but they are at least in the right direction.

As for the IITians reading this essay, understand the privilege you had. Certainly, life might have presented challenges before joining IIT. Nevertheless, it's important to recognize that a considerable number of individuals haven't had the opportunity to partake in the lifestyle and environment that IIT provides, along with the advantageous head start it offers upon graduation. Many kids just had that one specific unlucky day. Some kids couldn't get in because of the lack of the right guidance that they needed at the right time. A million dials were set right when you took that JEE exam, even though you had put up with a significant amount of stressful preparation for this examination.

On a ground level, an IIT tag does a lot of heavy lifting for identifying talented and hardworking people. And it is well deserved by the people who put up with so much hard work in their prime years of life. But neither is an IIT tag sufficient nor enough as a benchmark for hard work. The Indian tech talent has been much bigger than the number of Tier-1 college alums and could not have been possible without the consistent hard work put up by so many individuals who do not carry the IIT card. As a society, we ought to prioritise rewarding excellence over mere success and engage in discussions regarding this perspective when addressing our education system and institutions.

